Your lightning-quick judgment of Jessica being asleep was likely correct. And perhaps you
accidentally confirmed it by knocking something over and waking her up. Over time, we have all
become incredibly good at recognizing a number of signals that suggest that another individual is
asleep. So reliable are these signs that there now exists a set of observable features that scientists
agree indicate the presence of sleep in humans and other species.
The Jessica vignette illustrates nearly all of these clues. First, sleeping organisms adopt a
stereotypical position. In land animals, this is often horizontal, as was Jessica’s position on the
couch. Second, and related, sleeping organisms have lowered muscle tone. This is most evident in
the relaxation of postural (antigravity) skeletal muscles—those that keep you upright, preventing
you from collapsing to the floor. As these muscles ease their tension in light and then deep sleep,
the body will slouch down. A sleeping organism will be draped over whatever supports it
underneath, most evident in Jessica’s listing head position. Third, sleeping individuals show no
overt displays of communication or responsivity. Jessica showed no signs of orienting to you as
you entered the room, as she would have when awake. The fourth defining feature of sleep is that
it’s easily reversible, differentiating it from coma, anesthesia, hibernation, and death. Recall that
upon knocking the item over in the room, Jessica awoke. Fifth, as we established in the previous
chapter, sleep adheres to a reliable timed pattern across twenty-four hours, instructed by the
circadian rhythm coming from the brain’s suprachiasmatic nucleus pacemaker. Humans are
diurnal, so we have a preference for being awake throughout the day and sleeping at night.
Now let me ask you a rather different question: How do you, yourself, know that you have slept?
You make this self-assessment even more frequently than that of sleep in others. Each morning,
with luck, you return to the waking world knowing that you have been asleep. I So sensitive is this
self-assessment of sleep that you can go a step further, gauging when you’ve had good- or bad-
quality sleep. This is another way of measuring sleep—a first-person phenomenological
assessment distinct from signs that you use to determine sleep in another.
Here, also, there are universal indicators that offer a convincing conclusion of sleep—two, in
fact. First is the loss of external awareness—you stop perceiving the outside world. You are no
longer conscious of all that surrounds you, at least not explicitly. In actual fact, your ears are still“hearing”; your eyes, though closed, are still capable of “seeing.” This is similarly true for the other
sensory organs of the nose (smell), the tongue (taste), and the skin (touch).
All these signals still flood into the center of your brain, but it is here, in the sensory
convergence zone, where that journey ends while you sleep. The signals are blocked by a
perceptual barricade set up in a structure called the thalamus (THAL-uh-muhs). A smooth, oval-
shaped object just smaller than a lemon, the thalamus is the sensory gate of the brain. The
thalamus decides which sensory signals are allowed through its gate, and which are not. Should
they gain privileged passage, they are sent up to the cortex at the top of your brain, where they are
consciously perceived. By locking its gates shut at the onset of healthy sleep, the thalamus
imposes a sensory blackout in the brain, preventing onward travel of those signals up to the
cortex. As a result, you are no longer consciously aware of the information broadcasts being
transmitted from your outer sense organs. At this moment, your brain has lost waking contact
with the outside world that surrounds you. Said another way, you are now asleep.
The second feature that instructs your own, self-determined judgment of sleep is a sense of
time distortion experienced in two contradictory ways. At the most obvious level, you lose your
conscious sense of time when you sleep, tantamount to a chronometric void. Consider the last
time you fell asleep on an airplane. When you woke up, you probably checked a clock to see how
long you had been asleep. Why? Because your explicit tracking of time was ostensibly lost while
you slept. It is this feeling of a time cavity that, in waking retrospect, makes you confident you’ve
been asleep.
But while your conscious mapping of time is lost during sleep, at a non-conscious level, time
continues to be cataloged by the brain with incredible precision. I’m sure you have had the
experience of needing to wake up the next morning at a specific time. Perhaps you had to catch
an early-morning flight. Before bed, you diligently set your alarm for 6:00 a.m. Miraculously,
however, you woke up at 5:58 a.m., unassisted, right before the alarm. Your brain, it seems, is still
capable of logging time with quite remarkable precision while asleep. Like so many other
operations occurring within the brain, you simply don’t have explicit access to this accurate time
knowledge during sleep. It all flies below the radar of consciousness, surfacing only when needed.
One last temporal distortion deserves mention here—that of time dilation in dreams, beyond
sleep itself. Time isn’t quite time within dreams. It is most often elongated. Consider the last time
you hit the snooze button on your alarm, having been woken from a dream. Mercifully, you are
giving yourself another delicious five minutes of sleep. You go right back to dreaming. After the
allotted five minutes, your alarm clock faithfully sounds again, yet that’s not what it felt like to
you. During those five minutes of actual time, you may have felt like you were dreaming for an
hour, perhaps more. Unlike the phase of sleep where you are not dreaming, wherein you lose all
awareness of time, in dreams, you continue to have a sense of time. It’s simply not particularly
accurate—more often than not dream time is stretched out and prolonged relative to real time.
Although the reasons for such time dilation are not fully understood, recent experimental
recordings of brain cells in rats give tantalizing clues. In the experiment, rats were allowed to run
around a maze. As the rats learned the spatial layout, the researchers recorded signature patterns
of brain-cell firing. The scientists did not stop recording from these memory-imprinting cells when
the rats subsequently fell asleep. They continued to eavesdrop on the brain during the differentstages of slumber, including rapid eye movement (REM) sleep, the stage in which humans
principally dream.
The first striking result was that the signature pattern of brain-cell firing that occurred as the
rats were learning the maze subsequently reappeared during sleep, over and over again. That is,
memories were being “replayed” at the level of brain-cell activity as the rats snoozed. The second,
more striking finding was the speed of replay. During REM sleep, the memories were being
replayed far more slowly: at just half or quarter the speed of that measured when the rats were
awake and learning the maze. This slow neural recounting of the day’s events is the best evidence
we have to date explaining our own protracted experience of time in human REM sleep. This
dramatic deceleration of neural time may be the reason we believe our dream life lasts far longer
than our alarm clocks otherwise assert.
Though we have all determined that someone is asleep, or that we have been asleep, the gold-
standard scientific verification of sleep requires the recording of signals, using electrodes, arising
from three different regions: (1) brainwave activity, (2) eye movement activity, and (3) muscle
activity. Collectively, these signals are grouped together under the blanket term
“polysomnography” (PSG), meaning a readout (graph) of sleep (somnus) that is made up of
multiple signals (poly).
It was using this collection of measures that arguably the most important discovery in all of
sleep research was made in 1952 at the University of Chicago by Eugene Aserinsky (then a
graduate student) and Professor Nathaniel Kleitman, famed for the Mammoth Cave experiment
discussed in chapter 2.
Aserinsky had been carefully documenting the eye movement patterns of human infants
during the day and night. He noticed that there were periods of sleep when the eyes would rapidly
dart from side to side underneath their lids. Furthermore, these sleep phases were always
accompanied by remarkably active brainwaves, almost identical to those observed from a brain
that is wide awake. Sandwiching these earnest phases of active sleep were longer swaths of time
when the eyes would calm and rest still. During these quiescent time periods, the brainwaves
would also become calm, slowly ticking up and down.
As if that weren’t strange enough, Aserinsky also observed that these two phases of slumber
(sleep with eye movements, sleep with no eye movements) would repeat in a somewhat regular
pattern throughout the night, over, and over, and over again.
With classic professorial skepticism, his mentor, Kleitman, wanted to see the results replicated
before he would entertain their validity. With his propensity for including his nearest and dearest
in his experimentation, he chose his infant daughter, Ester, for this investigation. The findings
held up. At that moment Kleitman and Aserinsky realized the profound discovery they had made:
humans don’t just sleep, but cycle through two completely different types of sleep. They named
these sleep stages based on their defining ocular features: non–rapid eye movement, or NREM,
sleep, and rapid eye movement, or REM, sleep.
Together with the assistance of another graduate student of Kleitman’s at the time, William
Dement, Kleitman and Aserinsky further demonstrated that REM sleep, in which brain activitywas almost identical to that when we are awake, was intimately connected to the experience we
call dreaming, and is often described as dream sleep.
NREM sleep received further dissection in the years thereafter, being subdivided into four
separate stages, unimaginatively named NREM stages 1 to 4 (we sleep researchers are a creative
bunch), increasing in their depth. Stages 3 and 4 are therefore the deepest stages of NREM sleep
you experience, with “depth” being defined as the increasing difficulty required to wake an
individual out of NREM stages 3 and 4, compared with NREM stages 1 or 2.
Had I not added the vertical dashed lines demarcating each ninety-minute cycle, you may have
protested that you could not see a regularly repeating ninety-minute pattern. At least not the one
you were expecting from my description above. The cause is another peculiar feature of sleep: a
lopsided profile of sleep stages. While it is true that we flip-flop back and forth between NREM
and REM sleep throughout the night every ninety minutes, the ratio of NREM sleep to REM sleep
within each ninety-minute cycle changes dramatically across the night. In the first half of the
night, the vast majority of our ninety-minute cycles are consumed by deep NREM sleep, and very
little REM sleep, as can be seen in cycle 1 of the figure above. But as we transition through into thesecond half of the night, this seesaw balance shifts, with most of the time dominated by REM
sleep, with little, if any, deep NREM sleep. Cycle 5 is a perfect example of this REM-rich type of
sleep.
Why did Mother Nature design this strange, complex equation of unfolding sleep stages? Why
cycle between NREM and REM sleep over and over? Why not obtain all of the required NREM
sleep first, followed by all of the necessary REM sleep second? Or vice versa? If that’s too much a
gamble on the off chance that an animal only obtains a partial night of sleep at some point, then
why not keep the ratio within each cycle the same, placing similar proportions of eggs in both
baskets, as it were, rather than putting most of them in one early on, and then inverting that
imbalance later in the night? Why vary it? It sounds like an exhausting amount of evolutionary
hard work to have designed such a convoluted system, and put it into biological action.
We have no scientific consensus as to why our sleep (and that of all other mammals and birds)
cycles in this repeatable but dramatically asymmetric pattern, though a number of theories exist.
One theory I have offered is that the uneven back-and-forth interplay between NREM and REM
sleep is necessary to elegantly remodel and update our neural circuits at night, and in doing so
manage the finite storage space within the brain. Forced by the known storage capacity imposed
by a set number of neurons and connections within their memory structures, our brains must find
the “sweet spot” between retention of old information and leaving sufficient room for the new.
Balancing this storage equation requires identifying which memories are fresh and salient, and
which memories that currently exist are overlapping, redundant, or simply no longer relevant.
As we will discover in chapter 6, a key function of deep NREM sleep, which predominates early
in the night, is to do the work of weeding out and removing unnecessary neural connections. In
contrast, the dreaming stage of REM sleep, which prevails later in the night, plays a role in
strengthening those connections.
Combine these two, and we have at least one parsimonious explanation for why the two types
of sleep cycle across the night, and why those cycles are initially dominated by NREM sleep early
on, with REM sleep reigning supreme in the second half of the night. Consider the creation of a
piece of sculpture from a block of clay. It starts with placing a large amount of raw material onto a
pedestal (that entire mass of stored autobiographical memories, new and old, offered up to sleep
each night). Next comes an initial and extensive removal of superfluous matter (long stretches of
NREM sleep), after which brief intensification of early details can be made (short REM periods).
Following this first session, the culling hands return for a second round of deep excavation
(another long NREM-sleep phase), followed by a little more enhancing of some fine-grained
structures that have emerged (slightly more REM sleep). After several more cycles of work, the
balance of sculptural need has shifted. All core features have been hewn from the original mass of
raw material. With only the important clay remaining, the work of the sculptor, and the tools
required, must shift toward the goal of strengthening the elements and enhancing features of that
which remains (a dominant need for the skills of REM sleep, and little work remaining for NREM
sleep).
In this way, sleep may elegantly manage and solve our memory storage crisis, with the general
excavatory force of NREM sleep dominating early, after which the etching hand of REM sleep
blends, interconnects, and adds details. Since life’s experience is ever changing, demanding that
our memory catalog be updated ad infinitum, our autobiographical sculpture of storedexperience is never complete. As a result, the brain always requires a new bout of sleep and its
varied stages each night so as to auto-update our memory networks based on the events of the
prior day. This account is one reason (of many, I suspect) explaining the cycling nature of NREM
and REM sleep, and the imbalance of their distribution across the night.
A danger resides in this sleep profile wherein NREM dominates early in the night, followed by
an REM sleep dominance later in the morning, one of which most of the general public are
unaware. Let’s say that you go to bed this evening at midnight. But instead of waking up at eight
a.m., getting a full eight hours of sleep, you must wake up at six a.m. because of an early-morning
meeting or because you are an athlete whose coach demands early-morning practices. What
percent of sleep will you lose? The logical answer is 25 percent, since waking up at six a.m. will lop
off two hours of sleep from what would otherwise be a normal eight hours. But that’s not entirely
true. Since your brain desires most of its REM sleep in the last part of the night, which is to say the
late-morning hours, you will lose 60 to 90 percent of all your REM sleep, even though you are
losing 25 percent of your total sleep time. It works both ways. If you wake up at eight a.m., but
don’t go to bed until two a.m., then you lose a significant amount of deep NREM sleep. Similar to
an unbalanced diet in which you only eat carbohydrates and are left malnourished by the absence
of protein, short-changing the brain of either NREM or REM sleep—both of which serve critical,
though different, brain and body functions—results in a myriad of physical and mental ill health,
as we will see in later chapters. When it comes to sleep, there is no such thing as burning the
candle at both ends—or even at one end—and getting away with it.
HOW YOUR BRAIN GENERATES SLEEP
If I brought you into my sleep laboratory this evening at the University of California, Berkeley,
placed electrodes on your head and face, and let you fall asleep, what would your sleeping
brainwaves look like? How different would those patterns of brain activity be to those you are
experiencing right now, as you read this sentence, awake? How do these different electrical brain
changes explain why you are conscious in one state (wake), non-conscious in another (NREM
sleep), and delusionally conscious, or dreaming, in the third (REM sleep)?
Assuming you are a healthy young/midlife adult (we will discuss sleep in childhood, old age,
and disease a little later), the three wavy lines in figure 9 reflect the different types of electrical
activity I would record from your brain. Each line represents thirty seconds of brainwave activity
from these three different states: (1) wakefulness, (2) deep NREM sleep, and (3) REM sleep.
Prior to bed, your waking brain activity is frenetic, meaning that the brainwaves are cycling
(going up and down) perhaps thirty or forty times per second, similar to a very fast drumbeat.
This is termed “fast frequency” brain activity. Moreover, there is no reliable pattern to these
brainwaves—that is, the drumbeat is not only fast, but also erratic. If I asked you to predict the
next few seconds of the activity by tapping along to the beat, based on what came before, you
would not be able to do so. The brainwaves are really that asynchronous—their drumbeat has no
discernible rhythm. Even if I converted the brainwaves into sound (which I have done in my
laboratory in a sonification-of-sleep project, and is eerie to behold), you would find it impossible to
dance to. These are the electrical hallmarks of full wakefulness: fast-frequency, chaotic brainwave
activity.
You may have been expecting your general brainwave activity to look beautifully coherent and
highly synchronous while awake, matching the ordered pattern of your (mostly) logical thought
during waking consciousness. The contradictory electrical chaos is explained by the fact that
different parts of your waking brain are processing different pieces of information at different
moments in time and in different ways. When summed together, they produce what appears to be
a discombobulated pattern of activity recorded by the electrodes placed on your head.
As an analogy, consider a large football stadium filled with thousands of fans. Dangling over
the middle of the stadium is a microphone. The individual people in the stadium represent
individual brain cells, seated in different parts of the stadium, as they are clustered in differentregions of the brain. The microphone is the electrode, sitting on top of the head—a recording
device.
Before the game starts, all of the individuals in the stadium are speaking about different things
at different times. They are not having the same conversation in sync. Instead, they are
desynchronized in their individual discussions. As a result, the summed chatter that we pick up
from the overhead microphone is chaotic, lacking a clear, unified voice.
When an electrode is placed on a subject’s head, as done in my laboratory, it is measuring the
summed activity of all the neurons below the surface of the scalp as they process different streams
of information (sounds, sights, smells, feelings, emotions) at different moments in time and in
different underlying locations. Processing that much information of such varied kinds means that
your brainwaves are very fast, frenetic, and chaotic.
Once settled into bed at my sleep laboratory, with lights out and perhaps a few tosses and
turns here and there, you will successfully cast off from the shores of wakefulness into sleep. First,
you will wade out into the shallows of light NREM sleep: stages 1 and 2. Thereafter, you will enter
the deeper waters of stages 3 and 4 of NREM sleep, which are grouped together under the blanket
term “slow-wave sleep.” Returning to the brainwave patterns of figure 9, and focusing on the
middle line, you can understand why. In deep, slow-wave sleep, the up-and-down tempo of your
brainwave activity dramatically decelerates, perhaps just two to four waves per second: ten times
slower than the fervent speed of brain activity you were expressing while awake.
As remarkable, the slow waves of NREM are also far more synchronous and reliable than those
of your waking brain activity. So reliable, in fact, that you could predict the next few bars of NREM
sleep’s electrical song based on those that came before. Were I to convert the deep rhythmic
activity of your NREM sleep into sound and play it back to you in the morning (which we have also
done for people in the same sonification-of-sleep project), you’d be able to find its rhythm and
move in time, gently swaying to the slow, pulsing measure.
But something else would become apparent as you listened and swayed to the throb of deep-
sleep brainwaves. Every now and then a new sound would be overlaid on top of the slow-wave
rhythm. It would be brief, lasting only a few seconds, but it would always occur on the downbeat
of the slow-wave cycle. You would perceive it as a quick trill of sound, not dissimilar to the strong
rolling r in certain languages, such as Hindi or Spanish, or a very fast purrr from a pleased cat.
What you are hearing is a sleep spindle—a punchy burst of brainwave activity that often
festoons the tail end of each individual slow wave. Sleep spindles occur during both the deep and
the lighter stages of NREM sleep, even before the slow, powerful brainwaves of deep sleep start to
rise up and dominate. One of their many functions is to operate like nocturnal soldiers who
protect sleep by shielding the brain from external noises. The more powerful and frequent an
individual’s sleep spindles, the more resilient they are to external noises that would otherwise
awaken the sleeper.
Returning to the slow waves of deep sleep, we have also discovered something fascinating
about their site of origin, and how they sweep across the surface of the brain. Place your finger
between your eyes, just above the bridge of your nose. Now slide it up your forehead about two
inches. When you go to bed tonight, this is where most of your deep-sleep brainwaves will be
generated: right in the middle of your frontal lobes. It is the epicenter, or hot spot, from which
most of your deep, slow-wave sleep emerges. However, the waves of deep sleep do not radiate outin perfect circles. Instead, almost all of your deep-sleep brainwaves will travel in one direction:
from the front of your brain to the back. They are like the sound waves emitted from a speaker,
which predominantly travel in one direction, from the speaker outward (it is always louder in front
of a speaker than behind it). And like a speaker broadcasting across a vast expanse, the slow
waves that you generate tonight will gradually dissipate in strength as they make their journey to
the back of the brain, without rebound or return.
Back in the 1950s and 1960s, as scientists began measuring these slow brainwaves, an
understandable assumption was made: this leisurely, even lazy-looking electrical pace of
brainwave activity must reflect a brain that is idle, or even dormant. It was a reasonable hunch
considering that the deepest, slowest brainwaves of NREM sleep can resemble those we see in
patients under anesthesia, or even those in certain forms of coma. But this assumption was utterly
wrong. Nothing could be further from the truth. What you are actually experiencing during deep
NREM sleep is one of the most epic displays of neural collaboration that we know of. Through an
astonishing act of self-organization, many thousands of brain cells have all decided to unite and
“sing,” or fire, in time. Every time I watch this stunning act of neural synchrony occurring at night
in my own research laboratory, I am humbled: sleep is truly an object of awe.
Returning to the analogy of the microphone dangling above the football stadium, consider the
game of sleep now in play. The crowd—those thousands of brain cells—has shifted from their
individual chitter-chatter before the game (wakefulness) to a unified state (deep sleep). Their
voices have joined in a lockstep, mantra-like chant—the chant of deep NREM sleep. All at once
they exuberantly shout out, creating the tall spike of brainwave activity, and then fall silent for
several seconds, producing the deep, protracted trough of the wave. From our stadium
microphone we pick up a clearly defined roar from the underlying crowd, followed by a long
breath-pause. Realizing that the rhythmic incantare of deep NREM slow-wave sleep was actually a
highly active, meticulously coordinated state of cerebral unity, scientists were forced to abandon
any cursory notions of deep sleep as a state of semi-hibernation or dull stupor.
Understanding this stunning electrical harmony, which ripples across the surface of your brain
hundreds of times each night, also helps explain your loss of external consciousness. It starts
below the surface of the brain, within the thalamus. Recall that as we fall asleep, the thalamus—
the sensory gate, seated deep in the middle of the brain—blocks the transfer of perceptual signals
(sound, sight, touch, etc.) up to the top of the brain, or the cortex. By severing perceptual ties with
the outside world, not only do we lose our sense of consciousness (explaining why we do not
dream in deep NREM sleep, nor do we keep explicit track of time), this also allows the cortex to
“relax” into its default mode of functioning. That default mode is what we call deep slow-wave
sleep. It is an active, deliberate, but highly synchronous state of brain activity. It is a near state of
nocturnal cerebral meditation, though I should note that it is very different from the brainwave
activity of waking meditative states.
In this shamanistic state of deep NREM sleep can be found a veritable treasure trove of mental
and physical benefits for your brain and body, respectively—a bounty that we will fully explore in
chapter 6. However, one brain benefit—the saving of memories—deserves further mention at this
moment in our story, as it serves as an elegant example of what those deep, slow brainwaves are
capable of.Have you ever taken a long road trip in your car and noticed that at some point in the journey,
the FM radio stations you’ve been listening to begin dropping out in signal strength? In contrast,
AM radio stations remain solid. Perhaps you’ve driven to a remote location and tried and failed to
find a new FM radio station. Switch over to the AM band, however, and several broadcasting
channels are still available. The explanation lies in the radio waves themselves, including the two
different speeds of the FM and AM transmissions. FM uses faster-frequency radio waves that go
up and down many more times per second than AM radio waves. One advantage of FM radio
waves is that they can carry higher, richer loads of information, and hence they sound better. But
there’s a big disadvantage: FM waves run out of steam quickly, like a muscle-bound sprinter who
can only cover short distances. AM broadcasts employ a much slower (longer) radio wave, akin to
a lean long-distance runner. While AM radio waves cannot match the muscular, dynamic quality
of FM radio, the pedestrian pace of AM radio waves gives them the ability to cover vast distances
with less fade. Longer-range broadcasts are therefore possible with the slow waves of AM radio,
allowing far-reaching communication between very distant geographic locations.
As your brain shifts from the fast-frequency activity of waking to the slower, more measured
pattern of deep NREM sleep, the very same long-range communication advantage becomes
possible. The steady, slow, synchronous waves that sweep across the brain during deep sleep open
up communication possibilities between distant regions of the brain, allowing them to
collaboratively send and receive their different repositories of stored experience.
In this regard, you can think of each individual slow wave of NREM sleep as a courier, able to
carry packets of information between different anatomical brain centers. One benefit of these
traveling deep-sleep brainwaves is a file-transfer process. Each night, the long-range brainwaves of
deep sleep will move memory packets (recent experiences) from a short-term storage site, which
is fragile, to a more permanent, and thus safer, long-term storage location. We therefore consider
waking brainwave activity as that principally concerned with the reception of the outside sensory
world, while the state of deep NREM slow-wave sleep donates a state of inward reflection—one that
fosters information transfer and the distillation of memories.
If wakefulness is dominated by reception, and NREM sleep by reflection, what, then, happens
during REM sleep—the dreaming state? Returning to figure 9, the last line of electrical brainwave
activity is that which I would observe coming from your brain in the sleep lab as you entered into
REM sleep. Despite being asleep, the associated brainwave activity bears no resemblance to that
of deep NREM slow-wave sleep (the middle line in the figure). Instead, REM sleep brain activity is
an almost perfect replica of that seen during attentive, alert wakefulness—the top line in the
figure. Indeed, recent MRI scanning studies have found that there are individual parts of the brain
that are up to 30 percent more active during REM sleep than when we are awake!
For these reasons, REM sleep has also been called paradoxical sleep: a brain that appears
awake, yet a body that is clearly asleep. It is often impossible to distinguish REM sleep from
wakefulness using just electrical brainwave activity. In REM sleep, there is a return of the same
faster-frequency brainwaves that are once again desynchronized. The many thousands of brain
cells in your cortex that had previously unified in a slow, synchronized chat during deep NREM
sleep have returned to frantically processing different informational pieces at different speeds and
times in different brain regions—typical of wakefulness. But you’re not awake. Rather, you aresound asleep. So what information is being processed, since it is certainly not information from
the outside world at that time?
As is the case when you are awake, the sensory gate of the thalamus once again swings open
during REM sleep. But the nature of the gate is different. It is not sensations from the outside that
are allowed to journey to the cortex during REM sleep. Rather, signals of emotions, motivations,
and memories (past and present) are all played out on the big screens of our visual, auditory, and
kinesthetic sensory cortices in the brain. Each and every night, REM sleep ushers you into a
preposterous theater wherein you are treated to a bizarre, highly associative carnival of
autobiographical themes. When it comes to information processing, think of the wake state
principally as reception (experiencing and constantly learning the world around you), NREM sleep
as reflection (storing and strengthening those raw ingredients of new facts and skills), and REM
sleep as integration (interconnecting these raw ingredients with each other, with all past
experiences, and, in doing so, building an ever more accurate model of how the world works,
including innovative insights and problem-solving abilities).
Since the electrical brainwaves of REM sleep and wake are so similar, how can I tell which of
the two you are experiencing as you lie in the bedroom of the sleep laboratory next to the control
room? The telltale player in this regard is your body—specifically its muscles.
Before putting you to bed in the sleep laboratory, we would have applied electrodes to your
body, in addition to those we affix to your head. While awake, even lying in bed and relaxed, there
remains a degree of overall tension, or tone, in your muscles. This steady muscular hum is easily
detected by the electrodes listening in on your body. As you pass into NREM sleep, some of that
muscle tension disappears, but much remains. Gearing up for the leap into REM sleep, however,
an impressive change occurs. Mere seconds before the dreaming phase begins, and for as long as
that REM-sleep period lasts, you are completely paralyzed. There is no tone in the voluntary
muscles of your body. None whatsoever. If I were to quietly come into the room and gently lift up
your body without waking you, it would be completely limp, like a rag doll. Rest assured that your
involuntary muscles—those that control automatic operations such as breathing—continue to
operate and maintain life during sleep. But all other muscles become lax.
This feature, termed “atonia” (an absence of tone, referring here to the muscles), is instigated
by a powerful disabling signal that is transmitted down the full length of your spinal cord from
your brain stem. Once put in place, the postural body muscles, such as the biceps of your arms
and the quadriceps of your legs, lose all tension and strength. No longer will they respond to
commands from your brain. You have, in effect, become an embodied prisoner, incarcerated by
REM sleep. Fortunately, after serving the detention sentence of the REM-sleep cycle, your body is
freed from physical captivity as the REM-sleep phase ends. This striking dissociation during the
dreaming state, where the brain is highly active but the body is immobilized, allows sleep
scientists to easily recognize—and therefore separate—REM-sleep brainwaves from wakeful ones.
Why did evolution decide to outlaw muscle activity during REM sleep? Because by eliminating
muscle activity you are prevented from acting out your dream experience. During REM sleep,
there is a nonstop barrage of motor commands swirling around the brain, and they underlie the
movement-rich experience of dreams. Wise, then, of Mother Nature to have tailored a
physiological straitjacket that forbids these fictional movements from becoming reality, especially
considering that you’ve stopped consciously perceiving your surroundings. You can well imaginethe calamitous upshot of falsely enacting a dream fight, or a frantic sprint from an approaching
dream foe, while your eyes are closed and you have no comprehension of the world around you. It
wouldn’t take long before you quickly left the gene pool. The brain paralyzes the body so the mind
can dream safely.
How do we know these movement commands are actually occurring while someone dreams,
beyond the individual simply waking up and telling you they were having a running dream or a
fighting dream? The sad answer is that this paralysis mechanism can fail in some people,
particularly later in life. Consequentially, they convert these dream-related motor impulses into
real-world physical actions. As we shall read about in chapter 11, the repercussions can be tragic.
Finally, and not to be left out of the descriptive REM-sleep picture, is the very reason for its
name: corresponding rapid eye movements. Your eyes remain still in their sockets during deep
NREM sleep. III Yet electrodes that we place above and below your eyes tell a very different ocular
story when you begin to dream: the very same story that Kleitman and Aserinsky unearthed in
1952 when observing infant sleep. During REM sleep, there are phases when your eyeballs will jag,
with urgency, left-to-right, left-to-right, and so on. At first, scientists assumed that these rat-a-tat-
tat eye movements corresponded to the tracking of visual experience in dreams. This is not true.
Instead, the eye movements are intimately linked with the physiological creation of REM sleep,
and reflect something even more extraordinary than the passive apprehension of moving objects
within dream space. This phenomenon is chronicled in detail in chapter 9.
Are we the only creatures that experience these varied stages of sleep? Do any other animals
have REM sleep? Do they dream? Let us find out.
deltas, desalt, lasted salted slated staled retainers ternaries generating greatening resmelts smelters termless